How many thousand of my poorest subjects
are at this hour asleep.
Oh, sleep; oh, gentle sleep,
nature's soft nurse,
how have I frighted thee
that thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids down
and steep my senses in forgetfulness?
Why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoky cribs,
upon uneasy pallets stretching thee
and hushed with buzzing night flies to thy slumber,
than in the perfumed chambers of the great,
under the canopies of costly state,
and lulled with sound of sweetest melody?
Oh, thou dull god,
why liest thou with the vile in loathsome beds
and leav'st the kingly couch
a watchcase or a common larum bell?
Wilt thou, upon the high and giddy mast,
seal up the shipboy's eyes
and rock his brains
in cradle of the rude, imperious surge
and in the visitation of the winds,
who take the ruffian billows by the top,
curling their monstrous heads
and hanging them with deafing clamor in the slippery clouds,
that, with the hurly, death itself awakes?
Canst thou, oh, partial sleep,
give thy repose to the wet seaboy in an hour so rude,
and in the calmest and most stillest night,
with all appliances and means to boot,
deny it to a king?
Then happy low, lie down.
Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.
Many good morrows to Your Majesty.
Is it good morrow, lords?
'Tis 1:00, and past.
Why, then, good morrow to you all, my lords.
Have you read o'er the letters that I sent you?
We have, my liege.
Then you perceive the body of our kingdom,
how foul it is;
what rank diseases grow,
and with what danger, near the heart of it.
It is but as a body yet distempered,
who to his former strength may be restored
with good advice and little medicine.
My lord Northumberland will soon be cooled.
Oh, God.
That one might read the book of fate
and see the revolution of the times make mountains level
and the continent, weary of solid firmness,
melt itself into the sea.
And, other times, to see
the beachy girdle of the ocean too wide for Neptune's hips.
How chances mock
and changes fill the cup of alteration with divers liquors.
Oh, if this were seen,
the happiest youth, viewing his progress through,
what perils past, what crosses to ensue,
would shut the book, and sit him down and die.
'Tis not ten years gone since Richard and Northumberland,
great friends, did feast together,
and in two years after were they at wars.
It is but eight years
since this Percy was the man nearest my soul,
who, like a brother, toiled in my affairs
and laid his love and life under my foot.
Yea, for my sake,
even to the eyes of Richard gave him defiance.
But which of you was byó
you, cousin Nevil, as I may rememberó
when Richard, with his eye brimful of tears,
then checked and rated by Northumberland,
did speak these words, now proved a prophecy?
"Northumberland, thou ladder by the which
my cousin Bolingbroke ascends my throneó"
though then, God knows, I had no such intent,
but that necessity so bowed the state
that I and greatness were compelled to kiss.
"The time shall come," thus did he follow it,
"The time will come, that foul sin, gathering head,
shall break into corruption," so went on,
foretelling this same time's condition
and the division of our amity.
There is a history in all men's lives,
figuring the natures of the times deceased.
The which observed, a man may prophesy with a near aim
of the main chance of things as yet not come to light,
which in their seeds and weak beginnings lie entreasured.
Such things become the hatch and brood of time.
And by the necessary form of this,
King Richard might create a perfect guess
that great Northumberland, then false to him,
would of that seed grow to a greater falseness,
which should not find a ground to root upon, unless on you.
Are these things, then, necessities?
Then let us meet them like necessities.
And that same word even now cries out on us.
They say the bishop and Northumberland
are 50,000 strong.
It cannot be, my lord.
Rumor doth double, like the voice and echo,
the numbers of the feared.
Please it, Your Grace, to go to bed.
Upon my soul, my lord,
the powers you already have sent forth
will bring this prize in very easily.
To comfort you the more,
I have received a certain instance that Glendower is dead.
Your Majesty hath been this fortnight ill,
and these unseasoned hours must add perforce
unto your sickness.
I will take your counsel.
And were these inward wars once out of hand,
we would, dear lords, unto the Holy Land.
Come on; come on; come on, sir.
Give me your hand, sir.
An early stirrer, by the rood.
And how doth my good cousin Silence?
Good morrow, good cousin Shallow.
And how doth my cousin, your bedfellow,
and your fairest daughter and mine, my goddaughter Ellen?
Alas, a black ousel, cousin Shallow.
By yea and nay.
I daresay my cousin William is become a good scholar.
He is at Oxford still, is he not?
Indeed, sir, to my cost.
A' must, then, to the inns o' court shortly.
I was once of Clement's Inn,
where I think they will talk of mad Shallow yet.
You were called "lusty Shallow" then, Cousin.
By the mass, I was called anything.
And I would have done anything indeed, too, and roundly too.
There was I and little John Doit of Staffordshire
and black George Barnes and Francis Pickbone
and Will Squele, a Cotswold man.
You had not four such swinge bucklers
in all the inns o' court again.
And I may say to you,
we knew where the bona-robas were
and had the best of them all at commandment.
Then was Jack Falstaff, now Sir John,
a boy and page to Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk.
This Sir John, Cousin,
that comes hither anon about soldiers?
The same Sir John; the very same.
I see him break Skogan's head at the court gate
when a' was a crack not thus high.
And the very same day
did I fight with one Sampson Stockfish, a fruiterer,
behind Gray's Inn.
Jesu, Jesu, the mad days that I have spent.
And to see how many of my old acquaintance are dead.
We shall all follow, Cousin.
Certain, 'tis certain; very sure, very sure.
Death, as the Psalmist saith, is certain to all.
All shall die.
How a good yoke of bullocks at Stamford fair?
By my troth, I was not there.
Death is certain.
Is old Double of your town living yet?
Dead, sir.
Jesu, Jesu, dead.
A' drew a good bow, and dead.
Dead.
A' shot a fine shoot.
John a Gaunt loved him well and betted much money on his head.
Dead.
A' would clap you in the clout at 12 score
and carried you a forehand shaft a 14, a 14 1/2,
that it would have done a man's heart good to see.
How a score of ewes now?
Thereafter as they be.
A score of good ewes may be worth ten pounds.
And is old Double dead?
Here comes one of Sir John Falstaff's men, as I think.
Good morrow, honest gentlemen.
I beseech you, which is Master Justice Shallow?
I am Robert Shallow, sir; a poor esquire of this county,
and one of the king's justices of the peace.
What is your good pleasure with me?
My captain, sir, commends him to you.
My captain, Sir John Falstaff,
a tall gentleman, by heaven, and a most gallant soldier.
He greets me well.
I knew him a good backsword man.
How doth the good knight?
And may I ask how my lady his wife doth?
Sir, pardon.
A soldier is better accommodated than with a wife.
That is very good, i' faith; and it is very good indeed too.
Better accommodated.
It is good; yea, indeed, is it.
Good phrases surely are, and ever were, very commendable.
Accommodated.
It comes from "accommodo."
Very good; a good phrase.
Pardon me, sir; I have heard the word.
Phrase call you it?
By this good day, I know not the phrase,
but I will maintain the word
with my sword to be a soldierlike word,
by heaven, and a word of exceeding good command.
By heaven.
Here comes good Sir John.
Give me your hand, sir.
Give me Your Worship's good hand.
By my troth, you like well, and you bear your years very well.
Welcome, good Sir John.
I am glad to see you well, good Master Robert Shallow.
Master Surecard, as I think?
No.
No, Sir John, it is my cousin Silence
in commission with me.
Good Master Silence,
it well befits you should be of the peace.
Your good Worship is welcome.
Why, fie, gentlemen.
This is hot weather.
Have you provided me here half a dozen sufficient men?
Marry, have we, sir.
Will you sit?
Well, I beseech you, let me see them.
Where's the roll?
Let me see; let me see; let me see.
So, so, so, so.
Yea, marry, sir.
Ralph Mouldy.
Let them appear as I call.
Let them do so; let them do so.
Ralph Mouldy.
Where is Mouldy?
Here, an't please you.
What think you, Sir John?
A good-limbed fellow:
young, strong, and of good friends.
Is thy name Mouldy?
Yea, an't please you.
'Tis the more time thou wert used.
Most excellent, i' faith.
Things that are moldy lack use.
Very singular good, Sir John.
Well said, i' faith, Sir John.
Very well said.
Prick him.
I was pricked well enough before,
an you could have let me alone.
My old dame will be undone now
for one to do her husbandry and her drudgery.
You need not to have pricked me.
There are other men fitter to go out than I.
Go to; go to.
Peace, Mouldy; you shall go.
Mouldy, it is time you were spent.
Spent.
Peace, fellow, peace.
Stand aside.
Know you where you are?
Yes, well, for the other, let me seeó
Simon Shadow.
Let me have him to sit under.
He's like to be a cold soldier.
Where's Shadow?
Here, sir.
Whose son art thou, Shadow?
Myómy mother's son, sir.
Thy mother's son.
Like enough, and thy father's shadow.
Do you like him, Sir John?
Shadow will serve for summer.
Prick him.
Thomas Wart.
Wart?
Where's he?
Here, sir.
Is thy name Wart?
Yea, sir.
Thou art a very ragged wart.
Shall I prick him, Sir John?
It were superfluous,
for his apparel is built upon his back,
and the whole frame stands upon pins.
Prick him no more.
You can do it, Sir John; you can do it.
I commend you well.
Francis Feeble.
Here, sir.
What trade art thou, Feeble?
A woman's tailor, sir.
Oh.
Shall I prick him, Sir John?
Well, you may, but if he'd been a man's tailor,
he'd ha' pricked you.
Wilt thou make as many holes in an enemy's battle
as thou hast done in a woman's petticoat?
I will do my good will, sir.
You can have no more.
Well said, good woman's tailor.
Well said, courageous Feeble.
Thou wilt be as valiant
as the wrathful dove or most magnanimous mouse.
Prick the woman's tailor.
Well, Master Shallow; deep, Master Shallow.
Who's next?
Peter Bullcalf of the green.
Yea, marry, let me see Bullcalf.
Here, sir.
'Fore God, there's a likely fellow.
Here, prick me Bullcalf till he roar again.
Oh, Lord.
Good my lord captainó
Dost thou roar before thou art pricked?
Oh, Lord, sir.
I am a diseased man.
Oh, now what disease hast thou?
A whoreson cold, sir.
Oh.
A cough, sir, which I got with ringing in the king's affairs
upon his coronation day.
Come, come.
Thou shalt go to the wars in a gown.
We'll have away thy cold.
And I will take such order
that thy friends shall ring for thee.
Is here all?
Here is two more called than your number, Sir John.
You must have but four here, sir.
And so, I pray you, go in with me to dinner.
Come, I'll go drink with you, but I cannot tarry dinner.
By my troth, I'm glad to see you, good Master Robert Shallow.
Oh, Sir John, do you remember since we lay all night
in the windmill in Saint George's field?
No more of that, Master Shallow.
No more of that.
'Twas a merry night.
And is Jane Nightwork alive?
She lives, Master Shallow.
She never could away with me.
Never, no, no.
She would always say she could not abide Master Shallow.
By the mass, I would anger her to the heart.
She was then a bona-roba.
Doth she hold her own well?
Old, old, Master Shallow.
Nay, she must be old.
She cannot choose but be old.
Certain she's old
and had Robin Nightwork by Old Nightwork
before I came to Clement's Inn.
That's 55 years ago.
Cousin Silence, that you had seen that
that this knight and I have seen.
Said I well, Sir John?
We have heard the chimes at midnight, Master Shallow.
That we have.
That we have; that we have.
I' faith, Sir John, we have.
Our watchword was "Hem boys."
Come, let's to dinner; come, let's to dinner.
Oh, Jesus, the days that we have spent.
Hem boys.
Good Master Corporal Bardolph, stand my friend.
Here's four Harry ten shillings in French crowns for you.
In very truth, sir, I had as lief be hanged, sir, as go.
And yet, for mine own part, sir, I do not care.
But rather, because I am unwilling,
and, for mine own part, have a desire to stay with my friends.
Else I do not care, for mine own part, so much, sir.
Go to; stand aside.
And, good Master Corporal Captain,
for my old dame's sake, stand my friend.
She has nobody to do anything about her when I am gone;
and she is old and cannot help herself.
You shall have 40, sir.
Go to.
Stand aside.
By my troth, I care not; a man can die but once.
We owe God a death.
I'll ne'er bear a base mind.
An't be my destiny, so; an't be not, so.
No man's too good to serve's prince.
And let it come when it will.
If a man die this year, he is quit of it the next.
Well said.
Thou art a good fellow.
Faith, I'll bear no base mind.
Which men shall I have?
Four of which you please.
Sir, a word with you.
I have three pounds to free Mouldy and Bullcalf.
Go to.
Well.
Come, Sir John, which four will you have?
Do you choose for me.
Marry, then, Bullcalfó
Bullcalf, Mouldy, Shadow, and Feeble.
Mouldy and Bullcalf.
For you, Mouldy, stay at home till you are past service.
And for your part, Bullcalf, grow till you come unto it.
I'll none of you.
Sir John, Sir John, do not yourself wrong.
They are your likeliest men.
I would have you served with the best.
Will you tell me, Master Shallow, how to choose a man?
Care I for the limb, the thews, the stature, bulk,
and big assemblance of a man?
Give me the spirit, Master Shallow.
Here, take Wart.
You see what a ragged appearance it has.
A' shall charge you,
discharge you with the motion of a pewterer's hammer.
And this same half-faced fellow, Shadow.
Give me this man, for he presents no mark to the enemy.
The foeman may with as great aim level at the edge of a penknife.
And for a retreat,
how swiftly will this Feeble, the woman's tailor, run off.
Oh, give me the spare men, and spare me the great ones.
Bardolph, put me a caliver into Wart's hand.
Wart, traverse; thus, thus, thus.
Come, manage me your caliver.
So.
Very well.
Go to.
Very good.
Exceeding good.
Oh, give me always a little, lean, old, chapped, bald shot.
Well said, Wart.
Thou art a good scab.
Hold, there's a tester for thee.
He is not his craft's master.
He doth not do it right.
I remember in Mile End Green, when I lay at Clement's Innó
I was then Sir Dagonet in Arthur's showó
we had a little quiver fellow
who would manage you his piece thus.
And about and about, and come you in and come you in.
And "rah-tah-tah," would a' say, and "bounce" would a' say,
and away again would a' go, and again would a' come.
These fellows will do well, Master Shallow.
One, twoócome onó three, four.
God keep you, Master Silence.
I will not use many words with you.
Gentlemen both, farewell.
I thank you.
I must a dozen miles tonight.
Bardolph, lead the men away.
Hey, hup.
Hup, aye, hup, aye, hup, aye, hup, aye, hup, aye, hup, aye.
The Lord bless you, Sir John.
God prosper your affairs.
God send us peace.
Oh, God send us peace.
Now return visit our house.
Let our old acquaintance be renewed.
Peradventure I will with you to the court.
'Fore God, I would you would.
Go to.
I have spoke at a word.
As it isó
God keep you, Sir John.
God keep you.
May God keep you.
Farewell.
Fare you well, gentle gentlemen.
As I return,
I will fetch off these justices.
I do see the bottom of Justice Shallow.
Lord, Lord, how subject we old men are to this vice of lying.
This same starved justice hath done nothing but prate to me
of the wildness of his youth
and the feats he hath done about Turnbull Streetó
and every third word a lie.
I do remember him at Clement's Inn
like a man made after supper of a cheeseparing.
When a' was naked, he was, for all the world,
like a forked radish
with a head fantastically carved upon it with a knife.
A' was the very genius of famine,
yet lecherous as a monkey.
And the whores called him mandrake.
And now is this vice's dagger become a squire
and talks as familiarly of John a Gaunt
as if he'd been sworn brother to him,
and I'll be sworn he never saw him but once in the tiltyard,
and then he broke his head
for crowding among the marshal's men.
And now has he land and beefs.
Well, I'll be acquainted with him, if I return.
If the young dace be a bait for the old pike,
I see no reason in the laws of nature but I may snap at him.
Let time shape, and there an end.
My friends and brethren in these great affairs...
I must acquaint you that I have received
new dated letters from Northumberland,
their cold intent, tenor, and substance thus:
here doth he wish his person,
with such powers as might hold sortance with his quality,
the which he could not levy,
whereupon he is retired, to ripe his growing fortunes,
to Scotland,
and concludes in hearty prayers
that your attempts may overlive
the hazard and fearful meeting of their opposite.
Thus do the hopes we have in him
touch ground and dash themselves to pieces.
Now, what news?
West of this forest, scarcely off a mile,
in goodly form come on the enemy.
And by the ground they hide,
I judge their number in or near the rate of 30,000.
The just proportion that we gave them out.
Let us sway on and face them in the field.
Health and fair greeting from our general,
the prince, Lord John, and duke of Lancaster.
Say on, my lord of Westmoreland, in peace.
What doth concern your coming?
Then, my lord,
unto Your Grace do I in chief address
the substance of my speech.
You, lord archbishop,
wherefore do you so ill translate yourself
out of the speech of peace which bears such grace
into the harsh and boisterous tongue of war,
turning your books to graves, your ink to blood,
your pens to lances, and your tongue divine
to a loud trumpet and a point of war?
Wherefore do I this?
So the question stands.
Briefly, to this end.
We are all diseased,
and with our surfeiting and wanton hours
have brought ourselves into a burning fever,
and we must bleed for itó
of which disease our late king, Richard, being infected, died.
I have in equal balance justly weighed
what wrongs our arms may do, what wrongs we suffer,
and find our griefs heavier than our offences.
We see which way the stream of time doth run
and are enforced from our most quiet there
by the rough torrent of occasion
and have the summary of all our griefs,
when time shall serve, to show in articles,
which long ere this we offered to the king
and might by no suit gain our audience.
When we are wronged and would unfold our griefs,
we are denied access unto his person
even by those men that most have done us wrong.
When ever yet was your appeal denied?
Wherein have you been galled by the king?
What peer hath been suborned to grate on you
that you should seal this lawless bloody book
of forged rebellion with a seal divine
and consecrate commotion's bitter edge?
My brother general, the commonwealth
I make my quarrel in particular.
There is no need of any such redressó
or if there were, it not belongs to you.
Why not to him in part,
and to us all that feel the bruises of the days before,
and suffer the conditions of these times
to lay a heavy and unequal hand upon our honors?
Oh, my good Lord Mowbray,
construe the times to their necessities
and you shall see indeed,
it is the time and not the king that doth your injuries.
But this is mere digression from my purpose.
Here come I from our princely general to know your griefs,
to tell you from His Grace that he will give you audience,
and wherein it shall appear that your demands are just,
you shall enjoy them...
everything set off that might so much as think you enemies.
Then take, my lord of Westmoreland,
this schedule,
for this contains our general grievances.
This will I show the general.
Let it please you, lords,
in sight of both our battles we may meet,
and either end in peace, which God so frame,
or to the place of difference,
call the swords, which must decide it.
My lord, we will do so.
There is a thing within my bosom tells me
that no conditions of our peace can stand.
Fear you not that.
If we can make our peace upon such large terms and so absolute
as our conditions shall consist upon,
our peace shall stand as firm as rocky mountains.
Yea, but our valuation shall be such
that every slight and false derived cause,
yea, every idle, nice, and wanton reason
shall to the king taste of this action;
that, were our royal faiths martyrs in love,
we shall be winnowed with so rough a wind
that even our corn will seem as light as chaff
and good from bad find no partition.
No, no, my lord.
Note this.
The king is weary of dainty and such picking grievances,
for he hath found to end one doubt by death
revives two greater in the heirs of life.
Besides, the king hath wasted all his rods
on late offenders,
that he now doth lack the very instruments of chastisement,
so that his power, like to a fangless lion,
may offer, but not hold.
'Tis very true.
And therefore be assured, my good lord marshal,
if we do now make our atonement well,
our peace will, like a broken limb united,
grow stronger for the breaking.
Be it so.
Here returns my lord of Westmoreland.
The prince is here at hand.
Pleaseth your lordship to meet His Grace
just distance twixt our armies.
You are well encounter'd here, my cousin Mowbray.
Good day to you, gentle lord archbishop,
And so to you, Lord Hastings, and to all.
My lord of York, it better showed with you
when that your flock, assembled by the bell,
encircled you to hear with the reverence
your exposition on the holy text
than now to see you here an iron man,
cheering a rout of rebels with your drum,
turning the word to sword and life to death.
Oh, who shall believe
but you misuse the reverence of your place,
employ the countenance and grace of heaven
as a false favorite doth his prince's name,
in deeds dishonorable?
You have ta'en up, under the counterfeited zeal of God,
the subjects of his substitute, my father,
and both against the peace of heaven and him
have here upswarmed them.
Good my lord of Lancaster,
I am not here against your father's peace,
but, as I told my lord of Westmoreland,
the time misordered doth, in common sense,
crowd us and crush us to this monstrous form,
to hold our safety up.
I sent Your Grace the parcels and particulars of our grief,
the which hath been with scorn shoved from the court,
whereon this Hydra son of war is born,
whose dangerous eyes may well be charmed asleep
with grant of our most just and right desires.
Pleaseth Your Grace to answer them directly
how far forth you do like their articles.
I like them all and do allow them well
and swear here, by the honor of my blood,
my father's purposes have been mistook,
and some about him have too lavishly
wrested his meaning and authority.
My lord, these griefs shall be with speed redressed.
Upon my soul, they shall.
If this may please you,
discharge your powers unto their several countiesó
My lordó
As we will ours.
And here between the armies
let's drink together friendly and embrace,
that all their eyes may bear those tokens home
of our restored love and amity.
I take your princely word for these redresses.
I give it you and will maintain my word.
And thereupon I drink unto Your Grace.
Go, Captain, and deliver to the army this news of peace.
Let them have pay, and part.
I know it will well please them.
Hie thee, Captain.
To you, my noble lord of Westmoreland.
I pledge Your Grace.
And, if you knew what pains I had bestowed
to breed this present peace,
you would drink freely.
But my love to you shall show itself more openly hereafter.
I do not doubt you.
I am glad of it.
Health to my lord and gentle cousin, Mowbray.
You wish me health in very happy season,
for I am, on the sudden, something ill.
Against ill chances men are ever merry,
but heaviness foreruns the good event.
Therefore be merry, coz,
since sudden sorrow serves to say thus,
"Some good thing comes tomorrow."
Believe me, I am passing light in spirit.
The more, the worse, if your own rule be true.
The word of peace is rendered.
Hark, how they shout.
This had been cheerful after victory.
A peace is in the nature of a conquest,
for then both parties nobly are subdued,
and neither party loser.
Go, my lord, and let our army be discharged too.
And, good my lord, so please you, let our trains march by us,
that we may peruse the men we should have coped withal.
Go, good Lord Hastings,
and, ere they be dismissed, let them march by.
I trust, lords, we shall lie tonight together.
Now, Cousin, wherefore stands our army still?
The leaders, having charge from you to stand,
will not go off until they hear you speak.
They know their duties.
My lord, our army is dispersed already.
Like youthful steers unyoked,
they take their courses east, west, north, south;
or, like a school broke up,
each hurries towards his home and sporting place.
Good tidings, my Lord Hastings,
for the which I do arrest thee, traitor, of high treason.
And you, Lord Archbishop, and you, Lord Mowbray,
of capitol treason I attach you both.
Is this proceeding just and honorable?
Is your assembly so?
Will you thus break your faith?
I pawned thee none.
I promised you redress
of these same grievances whereof you did complain,
which, by mine honor,
I will perform with a most Christian care.
But for you, rebels, look to taste
the due meet for rebellion and such acts as yours.
Most shallowly did you these arms commence,
fondly brought here and foolishly sent hence.
Strike up our drums.
Pursue the scattered stray.
God, and not we, hath safely fought today.
What is your name, sir?
Of what condition are you and of what place?
I am a knight, sir, and my name is Colevile of the dale.
Well, then, Colevile is your name
and knight is your degree and your place the dale.
Colevile shall still be your name,
a traitor your degree,
and the dungeon your place, a place deep enough.
So should you be still Colevile of the dale.
Are not you Sir John Falstaff?
As good a man as he, sir, whoever I am.
Do ye yield, sir, or shall I sweat for you?
I think you are Sir John Falstaff,
and in that thought yield me.
Here comes our general.
Come, hie thee, sir.
The heat is past; follow no further now.
Call in the powers, good cousin Westmoreland.
Now, Falstaff, where have you been all this while?
When everything is ended, then you come.
These tardy tricks of yours will, on my life,
one time or other break some gallows' back.
I would be sorry, my lord, but it should be thus.
I never knew yet but rebuke and cheque was the reward of valor.
Do you think me a swallow, an arrow, or a bullet?
Have I, in my old and poor motion,
the expedition of thought?
I have speeded hither
with the very extremest inch of possibility.
And here, travel tainted as I am,
have in my pure and immaculate valor,
taken Sir John Colevile of the dale,
a most furious knight and valorous enemy.
But what of that?
He saw me and yielded,
that I may justly say,
with the hooknosed fellow of Rome,
"I came, saw, and overcame."
It was more of his courtesy than your deserving.
I know not.
Here he is, and here I yield him.
And I beseech Your Grace,
let it be booked with the rest of this day's deeds,
or, by the Lord, I'll have it in a particular ballad else,
with mine own picture on the top on't,
Colevile kissing my foot.
Therefore let me have right, and let desert mount.
Thine's too heavy to mount.
Well, let it shine, then.
Thine's too thick to shine.
Well, let it do something, my good lord,
that will do me good, and call it what you will.
Is thy name Colevile?
It is, my lord.
A famous rebel art thou, Colevile.
And a famous true subject took him.
I am, my lord, but as my betters are that led me hither.
Had they been ruled by me,
you should have won them dearer than you have.
How they sold themselves, I know not,
but thou, like a kind fellow, gavest thyself away gratis.
And I thank thee for thee.
Send Colevile with his confederates to York,
to present execution.
And now dispatch we toward the court, my lords.
I hear the king my father is sore sick.
Our news shall go before us to His Majesty,
which, Cousin, you shall bear to comfort him,
and we with sober speed will follow you.
My lord, I beseech you,
give me leave to go through Gloucestershire.
And when you come to court,
stand, my good lord, in your good report.
Fare you well, Falstaff.
I, in my condition, shall better speak of you than you deserve.
I would you had but the wit.
'Twere better than your dukedom.
Good faith,
this same young, sober-blooded boy doth not love me,
nor a man cannot make him laugh.
That's no marvel.
He drinks no wine.
There's never none of these demure boys comes to any proof,
for thin drink doth so overcool their blood
and making many fish meals
that they fall into a kind of male greensickness.
And then when they marry, they get wenches.
They are generally fools and cowards,
which some of us would be, too, but for inflammation.
A good sherris sack hath a twofold operation.
It ascends me into the brain;
dries me there all the foolish
and dull and curdy vapors which environ it;
makes it apprehensive, quick, forgetive,
full of nimble, fiery, and delectable shapes;
which, delivered o'er to the voice,
the tongue, which is the birth, becomes excellent wit.
The second property of your excellent sherris
is the warming of the blood, which, before cold and settled,
left the liver white and pale,
which is the badge of pusillanimity and cowardice.
But the sherris warms it,
makes it course from the inwards to the parts extreme.
It illumineth the face, which as a beacon gives warning
to all the rest of this little kingdom, man, to arm.
And then the vital commoners and inland petty spirits
muster me all to their captain, the heart,
who, great and puffed up with this retinue,
doth any deed of courage.
And this valor comes of sherris.
So that skill in the weapon is nothing without sack,
for that sets it awork,
and learning a mere hoard of gold kept by a devil,
till sack commences it and sets it in act and use.
Hereof comes it that Prince Harry is valiant,
for the thin blood
which he did naturally inherit from his father,
he hath, like lean, sterile, and bare land,
manured and husbanded and tilled with excellent endeavor
of drinking good and good store of fertile sherris,
that he is become very hot and valiant.
If I had a thousand sons,
the first humane principle I would teach them should be
to forswear thin potations and addict themselves to sack.
Captain!
The army is discharged all and gone.
Let them go.
I'll through Gloucestershire,
and there will I visit Master Robert Shallow, esquire.
I have him already tempering between my finger and my thumb,
and shortly will I seal with him.
Come, away.